Add Article (#1)
tajespasarela/tailwind-editor: README.md

> We could try to run the postcss and tailwind plugin directly in the browser, making it to work with node polyfills, using tailwind internals implementations like they do in [play.tailwindcss.com](https://play.tailwindcss.com/), or using the brand new [Web Containers](https://blog.stackblitz.com/posts/introducing-webcontainers/) but for simplicity's sake, we do it in a simple node service.
>

## Creating the project

Let’s create the new project called `tailwind-editor` with [Vite](https://vitejs.dev/) running `npm create`. I’m going to use [Vue](https://vuejs.org/) for the Frontend because I’m more comfortable with it and also because it is Awesome ;)

```bash
$ dev npm create vite@latest
✔ Project name: … tailwind-editor
✔ Select a framework: › Vue
✔ Select a variant: › JavaScript
```

Then, we add the dependencies for the service.

```bash
$ cd tailwind-editor

> $ npm install --save express cors postcss tailwindcss

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$ npm install express cors postcss tailwindcss
```

I would omit the `--save` flag since it is not nedeed.

```

The resulting package:

```json
{
  "name": "tailwind-editor",
  "private": true,
  "version": "0.0.0",
  "type": "module",
  "scripts": {
    "dev": "vite",
    "build": "vite build",
    "preview": "vite preview"
  },
  "dependencies": {
    "cors": "^2.8.5",
    "express": "^4.18.1",
    "postcss": "^8.4.17",
    "tailwindcss": "^3.1.8",
    "vue": "^3.2.37"
  },
  "devDependencies": {
    "@vitejs/plugin-vue": "^3.1.0",
    "vite": "^3.1.0"
  }
}
```

## Creating the Tailwindcss service

> Now, we are going to create the service that will receive the Tailwindcss config and return the CSS. Let’s start with a file `src/tailwind-as-a-service.js` which will contain the [ExpressJs](https://expressjs.com/) server with the `cors` middleware to support [cross-origin](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/CORS) calls. It is listening by port 8080 to any request to the root path with a `GET` method and returns a text with `Hello World`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now, we are going to create the service that will receive the `Tailwindcss` config and return the resulting `css`. 

Let’s start with a file `src/tailwind-as-a-service.js` which will contain the [ExpressJs](https://expressjs.com/) server with the `cors` middleware to support [cross-origin](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/CORS) calls. It is listening to port `8080`, returning a `Hello World` text to any request to the root path with a `GET` method.
```

Author: done 👍🏻

```jsx
// src/tailwind-as-a-service.js

import express from 'express';
import cors from 'cors';

const app = express()
app.use(cors());

> const port = 8080

Reviewer 2: You're not using this variable, at least in this example.

```suggestion
```

Author: it is used in the `listen` call:
<img width="532" alt="image" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/5759712/197460568-dbdad632-a218-48f1-b9f7-15355d03daaf.png">

Reviewer 2: 🤦🏿

app.get('/', (req, res) => {
  res.send('Hello World!')
})

app.listen(port, () => {
  console.log(`Tailwind as a service listening on port ${port}`)
})
```

> Running the server with node we have the response directly in the browser:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Running the server in node lets you check the response directly in the browser:
```

```bash
$ node ./src/tailwind-as-a-service.js
```

![Hello World](images/hello-world.png)

> We are using Node 16, which supports [ES modules](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Guide/Modules) by default. If you are using older versions of Node you can use CommonJs modules and just rename the file with the `.cjs` extension.

> >

Reviewer: I think the last sentence could be misleading of confusing. Someone could understand that renaming the file into `.cjs` is enough. Besides, Vite requires node `14.18+` and that version already supports es modules. Maybe would be better to specify a min version of node to follow this article and the demo. Something like:

Since we are using Vite and ES modules, the minimum node version required to follow this article is `14.18+`

So far, so good. Now we are going to configure `postcss` and its tailwind plugin to return CSS:

```jsx
// src/tailwind-as-a-service.js
......
import postcss from 'postcss';
import tailwindcss from 'tailwindcss';

......

const defaultCss = `
  @import 'tailwindcss/base';
  @import 'tailwindcss/components';
  @import 'tailwindcss/utilities';
`;

app.get('/', async (req, res) => {
  const configuredTailwind = tailwindcss({
    content: [{ raw: '<div class="bg-red-500">', extension: 'html' }]
  });
  const postcssProcessor = postcss([configuredTailwind]);
  const { css } = await postcssProcessor.process(defaultCss);
  res.send(css);
});

......
```

We added the `postcss` and `tailwindcss` dependencies. Then we configure the Tailwindcss plugin for postcss with the [content](https://tailwindcss.com/docs/content-configuration) option.

> This option tells Tailwindcss to inspect the HTML, JavaScript components and more files, to look for CSS classes to generate and include its CSS in the final result. It allows also us to put inline “raw” HTML.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This option tells Tailwindcss to inspect the HTML, JavaScript components and more files, to look for CSS classes to generate and include its CSS in the final result. It also allows us to put inline “raw” HTML.
```

Finally, we process a “fake” CSS file with the default base, components and utility styles of Tailwindcss. This is necessary to make Tailwindcss generate all necessary CSS.

The result CSS is returned in the response. So if we run again the service with `node ./src/tailwind-as-a-service.js` and we request from the browser, then we can see the resulting CSS:

![CSS response](images/css-response.png)

Here you can see the base CSS that [Tailwindcss brings by default](https://tailwindcss.com/docs/preflight) and also, at the end, the `.bg-red-500` class that we are passing as raw HTML to the Tailwindcss config.

So we have a service to request and return the CSS, but how do we configure that CSS? well let’s make this service receive parameters and use them to configure the Tailwindcss plugin:

```jsx
// src/tailwind-as-a-service.js

......
app.post('/', async (req, res) => {
  const configuredTailwind = tailwindcss({
    content: [{ raw: req.body.html, extension: 'html' }],
    theme: req.body.theme
  });
......
});
......
```

> Here, we changed the `.get` method into `.post` to be able to send and receive parameters in the request body, for larger parameters.

Reviewer 2: This part is a little bit confusing. I know this might be weird but maybe having a split side by side view of the previous code and the new one:

```text
<table>
<tr>
<th>before</th>
<th>after</th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
  
```jsx
// src/tailwind-as-a-service.js
......
app.post('/', async (req, res) => {
  const configuredTailwind = tailwindcss({
    content: [{ raw: req.body.html, extension: 'html' }],
    theme: req.body.theme
  });
......
});
......
-``` ( added - to avoid auto formatting so you can copy paste)
  
</td>
<td>

```jsx
// src/tailwind-as-a-service.js
......
app.get('/', async (req, res) => {
  const configuredTailwind = tailwindcss({
    content: [{ raw: '<div class="bg-red-500">', extension: 'html' }]
  });
......
});
......
-``` ( added - to avoid auto formatting so you can copy paste)

</td>
</tr>
</table>
```

Author: Added some missing lines to make it clearer. 

BTW the `-` didn't work for me, it breaks the markdown.

Reviewer 2: Oh, sorry, I meant I included it to avoid github's autoformatting, so you could copy paste it directly, instead of seeing the md part of the comment formatted and having to rewrite it by yourself. Sorry if I didn't explained myself clearly and you ended up wasting time 🤦🏿

```jsx
// src/custom-tailwind-config.js

export const customTailwindConfig = {
  colors: {
    primary: {
      25: '#cdd3d6',
      50: '#243d48',
      75: '#1b2d36'
    },
    secondary: {
      25: '#bfe1ec',
      50: '#0086b2',
      75: '#006485'
    },
    success: {
      25: '#ecfdf5',
      50: '#10b981',
      75: '#065f46'
    },
    warning: {
      25: '#fffbeb',
      50: '#f59e0b',
      75: '#92400e'
    },
    error: {
      25: '#fef2f2',
      50: '#ef4444',
      75: '#991b1b'
    },
    title: {
      1: '#000',
      2: '#a3a3a3',
      3: '#000',
      4: '#0e7490'
    }
  },
  fontSize: {
    button: '1rem',
    'size-title1': '2rem',
    'size-title2': '1.5rem',
    'size-title3': '1.25rem',
    'size-title4': '1.125rem'
  },
  fontWeight: {
    'weight-button': '400',
    'weight-title1': '700',
    'weight-title2': '700',
    'weight-title3': '400',
    'weight-title4': '400'
  }
};
```

> > Keep in mind that we are using the Tailwind Theme configuration for simplicity’s sake and it is not the only way to achieve the same result. The whole Tailwindcss configuration could be overridden, included the [plugins](https://tailwindcss.com/docs/plugins) used or de configuration of these plugins. You could think about to create your own Tailwindcss plugin, for example, which could add all your CSS components based on a configuration passed to the plugin. This configuration could be passed as parameter to the Tailwindcss service as we are doing here with the Theme configuration.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> Keep in mind that we are using the Tailwind Theme configuration for simplicity’s sake and it is not the only way to achieve the same result. The whole Tailwindcss configuration could be overridden, included the [plugins](https://tailwindcss.com/docs/plugins) used and/or their configuration. For example, you could create your own `Tailwindcss` plugin, adding all your `CSS` components based on a configuration passed to the plugin. This configuration could be passed as parameter to the `Tailwindcss` service as we are doing here with the `theme` configuration.
```

		          Button Secondary
		        </button>
		        <button class="w-40 h-8 rounded bg-success-50 hover:bg-success-75 text-success-25 hover:text-success-25 text-button font-weight-button">
		          Button Success
		        </button>
		        <button class="w-40 h-8 rounded bg-warning-50 hover:bg-warning-75 text-warning-25 hover:text-warning-25 text-button font-weight-button">
		          Button Warning
		        </button>
		        <button class="w-40 h-8 rounded bg-error-50 hover:bg-error-75 text-error-25 hover:text-error-25 text-button font-weight-button">
		          Button Error
		        </button>
		      </section>
		
		      <section class="flex flex-col gap-10 m-10">
		        <h1 class="text-title-1 text-size-title1 font-weight-title1">
		          Title 1
		        </h1>
		        <h2 class="text-title-2 text-size-title2 font-weight-title2">
		          Tittle 2
		        </h2>
		        <h3 class="text-title-3 text-size-title3 font-weight-title3">
		          Tittle 3
		        </h3>
		        <h4 class="text-title-4 text-size-title4 font-weight-title4">
		          Tittle 4
		        </h4>
		      </section>
		    </section>
		</section>
</template>
```

> Before of running the `dev` script for running the Vue project, we modify this script in the `package.json` file to run at the same time the tailwind service:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Before running the `dev` script to serve the Vue project, we will modify this script in our `package.json` to parallelise its execution with the tailwind service:
```

```json
"dev": "node ./src/tailwind-as-a-service.js & vite",
```

> Then we run the project and go to the local URL:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Afterwards, we run the project and visit the locally served URL:
```

```bash
$ npm run dev
```

In the [latest version of Vite](https://github.com/vitejs/vite/blob/main/packages/vite/CHANGELOG.md) we are using, the default port is `5153`:

![Running Vite](images/running-vite.png)

> And finally, we open that URL in the browser and… Ups! no styles?! what’s going on??

Reviewer 2: xD

![First try](images/first-try.png)

This is because we are not using Tailwindcss directly in our Vue project as we usually do. Instead, we need to call our `tailwind-as-a-service` endpoint to retrieve the CSS. Ok then, let’s create the function to call the service.

We create a new file `fetch-css.js` in the `src` directory:

```jsx
// src/fetch-css.js

export async functionfetchCss(tailwindCustomConfig) {

> return awaitfetch('http://localhost:8080', {

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
export async function fetchCss(tailwindCustomConfig) {
  return await fetch('http://localhost:8080', {
```

- Finally, we create a [dynamic component](https://vuejs.org/guide/essentials/component-basics.html#dynamic-components) to attach the CSS to the DOM. This dynamic component will render the CSS inside a `<style>` tag, when the `css` ref is updated. This way whenever we update the `css` ref value, the styles will be updated.

> We use a dynamic component as a workaround because the `<style>` tag is not allowed inside `<template>` tag by Vue template compiler.
>

Now, we import and use the `Editor.vue` component inside the `App.vue`:

```html
// src/App.vue

<template>

  <div class="flex flex-row">
		......

    <Editor/>
  </div>
</template>

<script setup>
  import Editor from './components/Editor.vue';
</script>
```

If we reload again the URL then we do see the styles:

![Second Try](images/second-try.png)

Finally, the last step is to make the `Editor.vue` modify the default Theme from the Tailwindcss configuration and request again the CSS from the service to see a live view of the changes.

We are starting with the colours, adding a colour picker for each colour we want to configure.

```html
// src/components/Editor.vue
<script setup>

> 	......

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
	import { onMounted, reactive, ref, watch } from 'vue';	
	......
```

  const css = ref('');

>   const editableCustomConfig = reactive(customTailwindConfig);

Reviewer 2: Maybe you should add the `reactive` import in this example, as someone without vue knowledge may not know where this function is coming from.

  async function getCss() {
    css.value = await fetchCss(editableCustomConfig);
  }

  onMounted(getCss);

>   watch(editableCustomConfig, getCss);

Reviewer 2: Same here for the `watch` function

- In the `<script>`:
  - First, we create a [reactive object](https://vuejs.org/api/reactivity-core.html#reactive) with our `customTailwindConfig` as the initial value.
  - Then we fetch the CSS with this reactive object.
  - Finally, we add a [`watch`](https://vuejs.org/guide/essentials/watchers.html) to call `getCss` function, whenever this reactive object changes
- In the `<template>`:
  - We add two loops [`v-for`](https://vuejs.org/api/built-in-directives.html#v-for) to iterate over each colour and each shade, binding a colour picker to the value.
  - We use the [`v-model`](https://vuejs.org/api/built-in-directives.html#v-model) directive with the [`lazy`](https://vuejs.org/guide/essentials/forms.html#lazy) modifier to not request too many times whenever we move the selector on the colour picker.

  > Notice we are binding the colour shade to the `v-model` using the colour and the shade name, instead of using the `v-for` variable directly. This is because the variable used to iterate in the `v-for` loops is not allowed to be modified. So the workaround is to access the value indirectly.
  >

>   Then if we run again the application we can see the colour pickers and changing a color the component using that colour will be updated automatically:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  Then, if we run again the application we can see the colour pickers and changing a color the component using that colour will be updated automatically:
```

    </section>

    <h2 class="font-bold">Font Weight</h2>
    <section class="flex flex-row flex-wrap gap-10">
      <label v-for="(_, weightName) in editableCustomConfig.fontWeight">{{
          weightName.replace('weight-', '')
        }}
        <input type="number"
               step="100"
               min="100"
               max="900"
               class="w-14 border border-black text-center"
               v-model="editableCustomConfig.fontWeight[weightName]">
      </label>
    </section>
  </div>

  <component is="style">{{ css }}</component>
</template>
```

Here we are repeating the same principle as with the colours, but with a single `v-for` for each case. Moreover, for the case of font size, we have to deal with the `rem` unit, adding and removing it, as it is necessary to pass it to the Tailwindcss configuration.

And here is the final aspect of the editor:

![Full Editor](images/full-editor.png)

So this is the starting point to create your own no-code tool, to configure your project and see the changes on the fly. Remind that using the Theme values is not the only way to make this configurable, and you can use all the Tailwindcss config options.

> You can find all the working code [here](https://github.com/tajespasarela/tailwind-editor) fell free to open issues or leave comments and stars 😉.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can find all the working code [here](https://github.com/tajespasarela/tailwind-editor). Please, feel free to open issues, give feedback and, if you have found it useful, a star would be much appreciated 😉.
```

## Why not CSS custom properties AKA CSS variables?

We could achieve exactly the same by using CSS variables as values in the Tailwindcss Theme configuration, and just modifying the value of these variables in the front, without the need for any service neither Tailwindcss process on the fly.

> Then after saving these variables and loading them in production will have deployed the changes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Then, after saving these variables and loading them in production will have deployed the changes.
```

Thinking about this idea, I wondered how to create a no-code editor for a web application. But, since a tool like this would be huge for a single post, I decided to focus only on the personalization of the styles and themes.

For that, I decided to rely on one of the most popular CSS frameworks at the moment: Tailwindcss. Not because of its usual use, but for all the tools it has in terms of configuration and CSS generation.

The idea is to create a frontend interface which allows to modify the [Tailwindcss configuration](https://tailwindcss.com/docs/configuration) on live and shows the result styles applied. Then, this customized configuration could be stored and used in the build and deployment process of a hypothetical application.

![Architecture](images/architecture.png)

But in this article, we are going to focus only on the editor part and how to preview on live the Tailwindcss config changes.

![Architecture Detail](images/architecture-detail.png)

> To achieve that we are going to create a simple service in Node using [ExpressJs](https://expressjs.com/). This service will receive the Tailwindcss configuration from the frontend editor and run [Postcss](https://postcss.org/) with the Tailwindcss plugin to generate the CSS. Finally, the service will return the generated CSS to the editor, which will update the page to show the changes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To achieve that, we are going to create a simple service in Node using [ExpressJs](https://expressjs.com/). This service will receive the Tailwindcss configuration from the frontend editor and run [Postcss](https://postcss.org/) with the Tailwindcss plugin to generate the CSS. Finally, the service will return the generated CSS to the editor, which will update the page to show the changes.
```

> > We could try to run the postcss and tailwind plugin directly in the browser, making it to work with node polyfills, using tailwind internals implementations like they do in [play.tailwindcss.com](https://play.tailwindcss.com/), or using the brand new [Web Containers](https://blog.stackblitz.com/posts/introducing-webcontainers/) but for simplicity's sake, we do it in a simple node service.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> We could try to run the postcss and tailwind plugin directly in the browser, making it to work with node polyfills. This is what they do in [play.tailwindcss.com](https://play.tailwindcss.com/) using tailwind internals implementations. Another option is the brand new [Web Containers](https://blog.stackblitz.com/posts/introducing-webcontainers/) but for simplicity's sake, we do it in a simple node service.
```

      <button class="w-40 h-8 rounded bg-warning-50 hover:bg-warning-75 text-warning-25 hover:text-warning-25 text-button font-weight-button">
        Button Warning
      </button>
      <button class="w-40 h-8 rounded bg-error-50 hover:bg-error-75 text-error-25 hover:text-error-25 text-button font-weight-button">
        Button Error
      </button>
    </section>
  
    <section class="flex flex-col gap-10 m-10">
      <h1 class="text-title-1 text-size-title1 font-weight-title1">
        Title 1
      </h1>
      <h2 class="text-title-2 text-size-title2 font-weight-title2">
        Tittle 2
      </h2>
      <h3 class="text-title-3 text-size-title3 font-weight-title3">
        Tittle 3
      </h3>
      <h4 class="text-title-4 text-size-title4 font-weight-title4">
        Tittle 4
      </h4>
    </section>
  </section>
  </section>
</template>
```

Before running the `dev` script to serve the Vue project, we will modify this script in our `package.json` to parallelise its execution with the tailwind service:

```json
"dev": "node ./src/tailwind-as-a-service.js & vite",
```

Afterwards, we run the project and visit the locally served URL:

```bash
$ npm run dev
```

> In the [latest version of Vite](https://github.com/vitejs/vite/blob/main/packages/vite/CHANGELOG.md) we are using, the default port is `5153`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We are using the [latest version of Vite](https://github.com/vitejs/vite/blob/main/packages/vite/CHANGELOG.md), so the default port is `5153`:
```
